---
layout: blogpost
title: Obsidian - quit other note-taking apps
date: 2025-09-11
tags:
  - software
  - markdown
  - efficiency
---
Note taking apps should be four things; intuitive, fast, simple, flexible. Everyone takes notes differently and for different reasons. Some people just need a place to quickly write down thoughts and never look at them again, some people build elaborate to do lists, some have a meticulously organized system of interconnected notes on books they read, lectures they attended and things they learned that day. A second brain. There are many programs and phone apps that try to accommodate all of these note-taking types or specialize on one of them. [Obsidian](https://obsidian.md/) has developed a cult-like following among 'second brain' or 'Zettelkasten' power users. But I want to explain why I think it's a great option for absolutely everyone.
<!--more-->
## Zettelkasten? Gesundheit!
Although I'm neither an Obsidian-cultist, nor a Zettelkasten/second brain method user or evangelist, I want to explain the concept. It's at the heart of why many people love Obsidian and I think it's interesting. The idea (and cultists may correct me) is that if you take notes and connect them in the right way, you can externalise your memories in such a way that the information you need is always at your fingertips without actively remembering it. This method of note taking and connecting is like having a map, a compass and a pencil. You don't need to memorize all the stuff as long as you know how to quickly find it. 'Zettelkasten' is a German word referring to a box of notes that are written on individual cards and then put into thematic compartments in said box. In German school, we were encouraged to learn like this, although it was referred to as a 'Karteikasten'.

Obsidian encourages and enables organizing notes by building a map of connections from keywords/hashtags or direct links between notes. The map can then be viewed as a Network graph. There are many cool videos on this on YouTube, but I won't go further into it here, since I don't use this feature at all. As I said, I think this is interesting, but even in school, this seemed very cumbersome and useless to me. I don't have the stamina to follow through on such elaborate schemes for long. I also find that once I write things down, I either remember them in my real brain, or remember where I wrote them down without a system or I remember where I got the information in the first place. So I'm a frequent but chaotic note taker. My notes often are just a headline and sometimes multiple pages. Many will never get read again, some are daily tools, some are important lists, some are distributed to others as meeting notes. Often I don't know which they are ahead of time. So for me, Obsidian is a multi tool, not a Zettelkasten. But it's a great multitool.

## What's in it for non-cultists?
Obsidian is free, lightweight, fast and available on all platforms, including mobile. It natively supports Markdown and renders it live. This means that as you write, the text will be formatted immediately, `# Headline` will immediately become large, `*text*` will immediately become cursive. You can choose whether you want to see the formatting symbols in 'source mode', whether you just want them to disappear immediately, or whether you want to just see the note in 'read mode' without being able to edit it. You can natively export to PDF, make presentation slides and choose between several built-in looks. 

Obsidian saves the notes in a directory of your choice and refers to this directory as a vault. The settings for Obsidian are saved together with the notes in the vault, and you can have as many vaults as you want. Within a vault, notes can also be organized in directories. The point of multiple vaults is to have dedicated spaces for different projects that consist of markdown files. This blog has its own vault, for instance. Many users will only have a single vault.

You can pay a subscription fee to sync your vault(s) between devices, but this is only a convenience feature. You can also use your own solutions, like OneDrive, Google Drive or git to back up and sync your vaults, since they are accessible directories on your computer. Other than sync all features of Obsidian are completely free.

In addition, there are thousands of community-maintained plugins that can add all kinds of advanced features to Obsidian. However, I recommend that you give Obsidian a try as it is without worrying about plugins. If there is a feature you are missing, see if there's a plugin for it, but resist the temptation of making it too complex 'just in case'. Being fast and simple is one Obsidians biggest strengths in my opinion.

## Why Obsidian beats the alternatives
For me, a chaotic note-goblin, the alternatives I have used before are [Google Keep](https://keep.google.com/), [Notion](https://www.notion.com/), MS Notepad, [Typora](https://typora.io/) and [MS OneNote](https://www.onenote.com/?public=1&wdorigin=ondcauth2&wdorigin=ondc). I have reasons to dislike them and deal-breakers that made me stop using them. The Google and Microsoft options I would prefer to not use simply because of the software and data monopoly aspect, but that's not enough of a reason if the product is good. The Microsoft options don't natively support Markdown, so they are inferior for my usage. Google Keep is primarily useful on the phone, and I still use it there if I quickly want to sync notes to somewhere. But I don't like writing or working in the browser on my PC. Too many distractions, bugs and too slow. 

Notion and Typora initially seemed good, but Typora started charging a subscription, which I was not willing to pay, given the very simple nature of the program. Notion started integrating a lot of (in my opinion) useless AI features and is in essence also a cloud-based service. This really became frustratingly obvious when I tried migrating my Notion notes to Obsidian. They are not stored as Markdown files on your computer. Notion takes them hostage in the cloud. This might seem convenient initially, but if it was just about convenience, why not leaving you a local copy? It's at least partially an effort to lock you into the program. OneNote makes it similarly hard to export or access your notes in other programs. This to me is the real sin. In [my post on plain text](/Beyond-Excel-Biology/2025/09/08/plain-text-markdown.html), I argued that one of the main aspects that make plain text files like Markdown powerful is their portability. They are readable anywhere. But only if they are actually saved as plain text files in a place that you can access.

Obsidian does all this and more. It constantly saves your notes to local, freely accessible files in a place of your choosing, it integrates with your preferred cloud service or offers a sync plan and it has all the features I need and want but is minimal and fast. The only possible criticism is that it's not open source. After almost two years of using it for free, I will start paying the subscription fee, at least for a time, to support a product I really enjoy. If you are even just a little curious, give it a try!